This is a beginners guide to grilling on a
charcoal grill.
I'm going to help you get started on the right
foot and avoid some of those common mistakes.
Let's dig in to the anatomy of the most common
charcoal grill, the Weber kettle.
This is the food grate and below it is the
charcoal grate, and that is where you put
your hot coals.
Beneath that is the ash cleanout system that
is controlled by this handle on the bottom.
It also acts as a damper to regulate air flow
and the temperature.
It is a good idea to mark where 1/4 open,
1/2 open, and full open are on the bottom
so you don't have to guess by looking through
the holes when you are cooking.
The lid has a vent that serves the exact same
purpose.
I'll deep dive on how the vents works in just
a little bit.
If you are looking at a new kettle spring
for the one with the ash catcher.
Its convenient and avoids a big mess and is
well worth the upgrade.
A lot of people will oversell you on the BBQ
accessories that you need, but this is the
basic starter pack.
A charcoal chimney makes it really easy to
light charcoal and avoids using lighter fluid,
which can put an off taste on your meat.
You are going to need some tongs as well as
a spatula to move the food around.
You'll need a good grill grate cleaning device
like a wire brush that makes cleaning those
grill grates a snap.
A good instant read thermometer is really
helpful because it will keep you from under
cooking the food and making people sick or
over cooking it and making it dry.
Beyond that, it is mostly just extras that
are nice to have.
One of my favorites is a wireless thermometer.
That allows me to check the temperature of
the pit and the meat while I'm inside and
it comes super handy when I'm grilling in
the winter time.
Another one is a good grill rake or tongs.
That allows you to move the coals around and
get them in just the perfect position.
But of course, you are going to need some
charcoal and they come in two main categories.
The first one is lump and it is generally
more expensive and it is made out of whole
wood.
The benefit is you get better flavor and a
lot less ash.
The second one is charcoal briquettes which
are made out of compressed sawdust and some
binders.
Generally speaking, this is what I recommend
for beginners because it gives you more even
heat and is a lot easier to find.
Its biggest drawback though is that it can
produce a bit more white smoke when you first
light it up, but if you wait just a little
bit longer before you put it on the grill,
you'll be able to get through that and have
great consistent results.
You can make great grilled food with either
one, but I do recommend that you stay away
from match light charcoal or anything that
has lighter fluid in it.
Lighter fluid can add a chemical taste to
your food and I avoid it at all costs.
A common mistake is they don't leave enough
time to light the charcoal before they need
to start cooking.
Plan on around 30 minutes before you are ready
to go.
Lighting your charcoal in a chimney is easy.
Grab a few sheets of newspaper and put a couple
drops of oil on them to help them a bit burn
longer.
Crumple them up and put them on the bottom
of the chimney.
Fill the chimney with charcoal.
3/4s full is a good place to start for most
general grilling.
Remember the more charcoal you light, the
hotter your fire will be.
While it is lit, you are going to watch the
smoke go from white, to grey, to clear and
that is when you are going to know that it
is ready to go.
Another common mistake is to pull your charcoal
too early before it is fully lit and if you
do that you are going to be fighting the temperatures,
trying to raise them for a really long tine.
It is a lot better to spend an extra couple
of minutes in the chimney to make sure those
coals are fully lit.
How you place your coals depends on the type
of cooking you are doing.
A thick layer is good for searing steaks or
a thinner layer is good for direct grilling
burgers and chicken.
I intentionally left half the grill without
charcoal to give me a spot to retreat to if
things get too hot.
That gives me lots of options during the cook
when dinner is on the line.
Now is a good time to add some wood chunks
or chips if you want a bit more flavor.
Just Take it easy . . . a little bit goes
a long way.
After I put the charcoal on, I like to ease
into my target temperature by leaving the
vents fully open until I reach about50 degrees
Farenheit below my target temp.
Then I'll start dialing it back a little bit
so that way it slowly ramps up.
Because if you overshoot, It is a lot harder
to reduce the temperatures later.
Your vent settings depend on a lot of factors
including wind, the weather, the temperature,
and the kind of charcoal that you are using,
so these are just general guidelines to help
you on your path.
For long cooks that are low and slow, like
ribs leave the bottom and top vent a quarter
open.
For common roasting temperatures, half open
on the bottom and almost fully open on top
is a good starting point.
For searing or high temperature roasting,
leave the top and bottom vents completely
open.
The vents control the temperature of the kettle
by allowing more or less oxygen to feed the
fire.
If you close the vents entirely, both top
and bottom, you'll snuff it out and save the
charcoal for next time.
If you are used to using a gas grill, adjusting
the temperature will not be as simple as turning
the knob.
You need to wait 10 or 15 minutes in between
adjustments Just to let the fire equalize
a bit before you think about making another
one.
If you don't wait, you are going to have to
make a ton of adjustments and you are going
to be chasing and fighting those temperatures
all day long.
Mastering your charcoal lighting is a really
important skill and I have a deep dive on
how to use a charcoal chimney right over here
for you to checkout next.